# This file was autogenerated by uv via the following command:
#    uv pip compile --extra=base --extra=api --extra=ml --output-file constraints/prod.txt pyproject.toml --index-strategy unsafe-best-match
accelerate==1.11.0
    # via
    #   flagembedding
    #   peft
aiohappyeyeballs==2.6.1
    # via aiohttp
aiohttp==3.13.1
    # via
    #   fsspec
    #   langchain-community
aiosignal==1.4.0
    # via aiohttp
amqp==5.3.1
    # via kombu
annotated-doc==0.0.3
    # via fastapi
annotated-types==0.7.0
    # via pydantic
anyio==4.11.0
    # via
    #   httpx
    #   openai
    #   starlette
    #   watchfiles
appdirs==1.4.4
    # via ragas
apscheduler==3.11.0
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
attrs==25.4.0
    # via aiohttp
beautifulsoup4==4.14.2
    # via ir-datasets
bertopic==0.17.3
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
billiard==4.2.2
    # via celery
cachetools==6.2.1
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
cbor==1.0.0
    # via trec-car-tools
celery==5.5.3
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
certifi==2025.10.5
    # via
    #   httpcore
    #   httpx
    #   requests
cffi==2.0.0
    # via cryptography
charset-normalizer==3.4.4
    # via requests
click==8.3.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   celery
    #   click-didyoumean
    #   click-plugins
    #   click-repl
    #   uvicorn
click-didyoumean==0.3.1
    # via celery
click-plugins==1.1.1.2
    # via celery
click-repl==0.3.0
    # via celery
colorama==0.4.6
    # via
    #   click
    #   tqdm
    #   uvicorn
cryptography==46.0.3
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
dataclasses-json==0.6.7
    # via langchain-community
datasets==4.3.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   evaluate
    #   flagembedding
    #   ragas
defusedxml==0.7.1
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
dill==0.4.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   multiprocess
distro==1.9.0
    # via openai
evaluate==0.4.6
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
fastapi==0.120.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   strawberry-graphql
filelock==3.20.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
    #   transformers
flagembedding==1.3.5
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
frozenlist==1.8.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   aiosignal
fsspec==2025.9.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
graphql-core==3.2.6
    # via strawberry-graphql
greenlet==3.2.4
    # via sqlalchemy
h11==0.16.0
    # via
    #   httpcore
    #   uvicorn
hdbscan==0.8.40
    # via bertopic
httpcore==1.0.9
    # via httpx
httptools==0.7.1
    # via uvicorn
httpx==0.28.1
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   datasets
    #   langgraph-sdk
    #   langsmith
    #   openai
httpx-sse==0.4.3
    # via langchain-community
huggingface-hub==0.36.0
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   peft
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   tokenizers
    #   transformers
idna==3.11
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   httpx
    #   requests
    #   yarl
ijson==3.4.0.post0
    # via ir-datasets
importlib-metadata==8.7.0
    # via opentelemetry-api
inscriptis==2.6.0
    # via ir-datasets
ir-datasets==0.5.11
    # via flagembedding
jinja2==3.1.6
    # via torch
jiter==0.11.1
    # via openai
joblib==1.5.2
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   hdbscan
    #   pynndescent
    #   scikit-learn
jsonpatch==1.33
    # via langchain-core
jsonpointer==3.0.0
    # via jsonpatch
kombu==5.5.4
    # via celery
langchain==1.0.3
    # via ragas
langchain-classic==1.0.0
    # via langchain-community
langchain-community==0.4.1
    # via ragas
langchain-core==1.0.2
    # via
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-classic
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-openai
    #   langchain-text-splitters
    #   langgraph
    #   langgraph-checkpoint
    #   langgraph-prebuilt
    #   ragas
langchain-openai==1.0.1
    # via ragas
langchain-text-splitters==1.0.0
    # via langchain-classic
langgraph==1.0.2
    # via langchain
langgraph-checkpoint==3.0.0
    # via
    #   langgraph
    #   langgraph-prebuilt
langgraph-prebuilt==1.0.2
    # via langgraph
langgraph-sdk==0.2.9
    # via langgraph
langsmith==0.4.38
    # via
    #   langchain-classic
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-core
llvmlite==0.45.1
    # via
    #   bertopic
    #   numba
    #   pynndescent
lxml==6.0.2
    # via
    #   inscriptis
    #   ir-datasets
lz4==4.4.4
    # via ir-datasets
markupsafe==3.0.3
    # via jinja2
marshmallow==3.26.1
    # via dataclasses-json
more-itertools==10.8.0
    # via openai-whisper
mpmath==1.3.0
    # via sympy
multidict==6.7.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
multiprocess==0.70.16
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
mypy-extensions==1.1.0
    # via typing-inspect
narwhals==2.9.0
    # via plotly
neo4j==5.28.2
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
nest-asyncio==1.6.0
    # via ragas
networkx==3.5
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   torch
numba==0.62.1
    # via
    #   openai-whisper
    #   pynndescent
    #   umap-learn
numpy==2.3.4
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   accelerate
    #   bertopic
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   hdbscan
    #   ir-datasets
    #   langchain-community
    #   numba
    #   openai-whisper
    #   pandas
    #   peft
    #   ragas
    #   scikit-learn
    #   scipy
    #   transformers
    #   trec-car-tools
    #   umap-learn
openai==1.109.1
    # via
    #   langchain-openai
    #   ragas
openai-whisper==20231117
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
opentelemetry-api==1.38.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   opentelemetry-sdk
    #   opentelemetry-semantic-conventions
opentelemetry-sdk==1.38.0
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
opentelemetry-semantic-conventions==0.59b0
    # via opentelemetry-sdk
orjson==3.11.4
    # via
    #   langgraph-sdk
    #   langsmith
ormsgpack==1.11.0
    # via langgraph-checkpoint
packaging==24.2
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   kombu
    #   langchain-core
    #   langsmith
    #   marshmallow
    #   peft
    #   plotly
    #   transformers
pandas==2.3.3
    # via
    #   bertopic
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
peft==0.17.1
    # via flagembedding
pillow==12.0.0
    # via sentence-transformers
plotly==6.3.1
    # via bertopic
prometheus-client==0.23.1
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
prompt-toolkit==3.0.52
    # via click-repl
propcache==0.4.1
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
protobuf==6.33.0
    # via flagembedding
psutil==7.1.2
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   peft
pyarrow==22.0.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   ir-datasets
pycparser==2.23
    # via cffi
pydantic==2.12.3
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   fastapi
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-classic
    #   langchain-core
    #   langgraph
    #   langsmith
    #   openai
    #   pydantic-settings
pydantic-core==2.41.4
    # via pydantic
pydantic-settings==2.11.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   langchain-community
pyjwt==2.10.1
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
pynndescent==0.5.13
    # via umap-learn
pypdf==6.1.3
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
pysbd==0.3.4
    # via ragas
python-dateutil==2.9.0.post0
    # via
    #   celery
    #   pandas
    #   strawberry-graphql
python-dotenv==1.1.1
    # via
    #   pydantic-settings
    #   uvicorn
python-multipart==0.0.20
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   strawberry-graphql
pythonbible==0.13.1
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
pytz==2025.2
    # via
    #   neo4j
    #   pandas
pyyaml==6.0.3
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   ir-datasets
    #   langchain-classic
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-core
    #   peft
    #   transformers
    #   uvicorn
ragas==0.1.19
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
regex==2025.10.23
    # via
    #   tiktoken
    #   transformers
requests==2.32.5
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   inscriptis
    #   ir-datasets
    #   langchain-classic
    #   langchain-community
    #   langsmith
    #   requests-toolbelt
    #   tiktoken
    #   transformers
requests-toolbelt==1.0.0
    # via langsmith
safetensors==0.6.2
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   peft
    #   transformers
scikit-learn==1.7.2
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   bertopic
    #   hdbscan
    #   pynndescent
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   umap-learn
scipy==1.16.2
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   hdbscan
    #   pynndescent
    #   scikit-learn
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   umap-learn
sentence-transformers==5.1.2
    # via
    #   bertopic
    #   flagembedding
sentencepiece==0.2.1
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   flagembedding
setuptools==80.9.0
    # via torch
six==1.17.0
    # via python-dateutil
sniffio==1.3.1
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   openai
soupsieve==2.8
    # via beautifulsoup4
sqlalchemy==2.0.44
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   langchain-classic
    #   langchain-community
starlette==0.48.0
    # via fastapi
strawberry-graphql==0.220.0
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
sympy==1.14.0
    # via torch
tenacity==8.5.0
    # via
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-core
threadpoolctl==3.6.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   scikit-learn
tiktoken==0.12.0
    # via
    #   langchain-openai
    #   openai-whisper
    #   ragas
tokenizers==0.22.1
    # via transformers
torch==2.9.0+cpu
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   accelerate
    #   flagembedding
    #   openai-whisper
    #   peft
    #   sentence-transformers
tqdm==4.67.1
    # via
    #   bertopic
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   ir-datasets
    #   openai
    #   openai-whisper
    #   peft
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   transformers
    #   umap-learn
transformers==4.57.1
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   flagembedding
    #   peft
    #   sentence-transformers
trec-car-tools==2.6
    # via ir-datasets
typing-extensions==4.15.0
    # via
    #   theoria (pyproject.toml)
    #   aiosignal
    #   anyio
    #   beautifulsoup4
    #   fastapi
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   langchain-core
    #   openai
    #   opentelemetry-api
    #   opentelemetry-sdk
    #   opentelemetry-semantic-conventions
    #   pydantic
    #   pydantic-core
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   sqlalchemy
    #   starlette
    #   strawberry-graphql
    #   torch
    #   typing-inspect
    #   typing-inspection
typing-inspect==0.9.0
    # via dataclasses-json
typing-inspection==0.4.2
    # via
    #   pydantic
    #   pydantic-settings
tzdata==2025.2
    # via
    #   kombu
    #   pandas
    #   tzlocal
tzlocal==5.3.1
    # via apscheduler
umap-learn==0.5.9.post2
    # via bertopic
unlzw3==0.2.3
    # via ir-datasets
urllib3==2.5.0
    # via requests
uvicorn==0.38.0
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
vine==5.1.0
    # via
    #   amqp
    #   celery
    #   kombu
warc3-wet==0.2.5
    # via ir-datasets
warc3-wet-clueweb09==0.2.5
    # via ir-datasets
watchfiles==1.1.1
    # via uvicorn
wcwidth==0.2.14
    # via prompt-toolkit
websockets==15.0.1
    # via uvicorn
webvtt-py==0.5.1
    # via theoria (pyproject.toml)
xxhash==3.6.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   langgraph
yarl==1.22.0
    # via aiohttp
zipp==3.23.0
    # via importlib-metadata
zlib-state==0.1.10
    # via ir-datasets
zstandard==0.25.0
    # via langsmith
