docs/audit_mode_spec.md, before:

# Theoria Audit and Verification System Specification

## 1. Purpose and Context
Theoria currently relies on retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to synthesize responses for domains that are rich in neuroscience and reasoning-heavy content. Because the product owners may not always have deep subject-matter expertise, they need an automated way to judge whether answers are faithful to trusted sources before presenting them to end users. This specification describes a multi-mode audit subsystem that adds layered verification, structured provenance logging, and human escalation paths without requiring a permanent human-in-the-loop.

## 2. High-Level Goals
- **Replace ad-hoc manual vetting** with an agentic workflow that self-checks answers before they reach users.
- **Expose actionable trust signals** (claim-level labels, confidence scores, provenance) so non-experts can decide when human review is required.
- **Maintain normal response speed** while providing an on-demand and automated audit trail for high-risk answers.
- **Support nightly batch verification** that surfaces problematic knowledge-base entries or stale citations.

## 3. Operating Modes
| Mode | Trigger | Behavior | Outputs |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Normal** | Default mode or user selection | Standard RAG answer generation using existing retrieval, answer drafting, and citation attachment. | Final answer with inline citations. |
| **Audit-Local** | Manual toggle or automatic trigger (e.g., domain risk level, user role) | Executes the verification loop using only indexed internal sources. Scores each claim for faithfulness and stores provenance. | Final answer, claim-level labels (SUPPORTED/REFUTED/NEI), confidence scores, structured Claim Cards. |
| **Audit-Web** | Escalation from Audit-Local due to low confidence, missing support, or conflicting evidence | Performs targeted web search against whitelisted domains, runs verification, and revises answer if needed. | Revised answer with external citations, Claim Cards noting external provenance, escalation log. |

## 4. System Components
### 4.1 Claim Extraction
- Segment each generated answer into atomic factual claims (numbers, named entities, causal statements).
- Use a deterministic prompt template that produces JSON `[{"claim_id": "c1", "text": "..."}, ...]`.

### 4.2 Verification Loop
1. **CoVe Self-Consistency**
   - Generate verification questions for each claim.
   - Re-answer using the retriever; compare with the drafted claim.
   - Produce a consistency score per claim.
2. **SelfCheck Sampling**
   - Sample `k` alternate answers using controlled temperature.
   - Flag claims that contradict or lack mention across samples.
3. **Evidence Retrieval**
   - Retrieve supporting passages from the knowledge base (and from the web when in Audit-Web mode).
   - Score relevance/faithfulness via embedding similarity and token overlap.
4. **RAGAS Scoring**
   - Compute faithfulness, answer relevance, and context precision/recall metrics.
   - Aggregate into `audit_score` ∈ [0,1].
5. **Claim Labeling**
   - Map evidence and scores to FEVER-style labels:
     - `SUPPORTED` when evidence aligns and score ≥ threshold.
     - `REFUTED` when evidence contradicts claim.
     - `NEI` when no evidence exists or confidence < threshold.

### 4.3 Escalation Logic
- Escalate to Audit-Web when any of the following are true:
  - Claim has `audit_score < audit_score_threshold` (see appendix).
  - No supporting passage retrieved locally.
  - SelfCheck disagreement ratio > `selfcheck_disagreement_threshold` (currently 0.40).
  - Source age exceeds freshness policy (e.g., >18 months for neuroscience claims).
- In Audit-Web mode, restrict searches to configured domains (PubMed, arXiv, ACL Anthology, etc.) and annotate Claim Cards with external provenance.

### 4.4 Provenance Logging
- Persist Claim Cards following a W3C PROV-inspired schema (see §6).
- Store linkage between answers, claims, evidence chunks, and verification methods.
- Support filtering and export (e.g., daily CSV/JSON bundles of low-confidence claims).

### 4.5 Nightly Batch Auditor
- Reprocess the day’s interactions focusing on claims labeled `REFUTED` or `NEI` with confidence <`low_confidence_threshold` (0.60).
- Re-run verification with refreshed retrieval indices and web checks.
- Produce a summary report (top failing KB entries, stale sources, recommended human review items).
- Optionally trigger re-indexing tasks or knowledge-base curation tickets.

## 5. Data Flow Overview
1. **Answer Drafting**: Standard RAG pipeline produces a draft answer with citations.
2. **Claim Extraction**: Draft is converted into atomic claims.
3. **Local Verification**: CoVe + SelfCheck + evidence retrieval produce metrics and labels.
4. **Escalation Decision**: Based on metrics, either finalize (Normal/Audit-Local) or escalate (Audit-Web).
5. **External Verification**: Conduct targeted web verification; update answer and labels.
6. **Storage**: Persist Claim Cards, audit metrics, and final answer in the audit store.
7. **Batch Processing**: Nightly job re-evaluates low-confidence claims and generates reports.

## 6. Claim Card Schema (JSON)
```json
{
  "claim_id": "c1",
  "answer_id": "a-2025-10-18-001",
  "text": "Long-term potentiation requires NMDA receptor activation.",
  "mode": "Audit-Local",
  "label": "SUPPORTED",
  "confidence": 0.87,
  "evidence": [
    {
      "source_type": "kb",
      "source_id": "kb_chunk_1345",
      "title": "Synaptic Plasticity Overview",
      "uri": "kb://synaptic_plasticity_overview",
      "snippet": "Long-term potentiation (LTP) is dependent on NMDA receptors...",
      "hash": "sha256:..."
    }
  ],
  "verification_methods": [
    "CoVe",
    "SelfCheckGPT",
    "RAGAS"
  ],
  "metrics": {
    "faithfulness": 0.86,
    "answer_relevance": 0.92,
    "context_precision": 0.78,
    "selfcheck_disagreement": 0.1
  },
  "timestamps": {
    "drafted_at": "2025-10-18T08:15:00Z",
    "verified_at": "2025-10-18T08:15:12Z"
  },
  "escalations": []
}
```

## 7. Integration Points
- **Retrieval Service**: Extend API to support claim-focused queries and freshness filters.
- **Generation Orchestrator**: Add mode toggle (Normal vs Audit-Local vs Audit-Web) and attach verification loop results to responses.
- **Audit Store**: New persistence layer (document DB or relational tables) for Claim Cards and audit reports.
- **Reporting Layer**: Dashboard widgets for trust scores, claim statuses, and nightly audit summaries.
- **External Search Connector**: Service wrapper for controlled web search with domain allow-listing and caching.

## 8. User Experience Considerations
- **UI Indicators**: Display per-claim badges (Supported, Refuted, Needs Evidence) with hover tooltips showing key metrics.
- **Mode Selection**: Provide toggle in admin console; allow per-user or per-conversation defaults.
- **Escalation Queue**: Dedicated view that lists claims requiring human follow-up, sorted by risk.
- **Export Functionality**: Allow exporting Claim Cards for external review (e.g., sending to a trusted agent for validation).

## 9. Security & Compliance
- Ensure external verification calls respect data residency policies.
- Hash or redact sensitive KB content when storing snippets.
- Maintain audit logs for regulatory compliance (timestamps, actors, decisions).

## 10. Implementation Roadmap
1. **Phase 0 – Foundations (1-2 weeks)**
   - Implement Claim Extraction service and Claim Card schema.
   - Integrate RAGAS scoring into current pipeline.
2. **Phase 1 – Audit-Local (2-3 weeks)**
   - Build verification loop with CoVe and SelfCheck.
   - Store Claim Cards and expose metrics in API/UI.
3. **Phase 2 – Audit-Web (2 weeks)**
   - Add escalation logic and external search connector.
   - Update UI to display external provenance.
4. **Phase 3 – Batch Auditor & Reporting (2 weeks)**
   - Implement nightly job, reporting dashboards, and export utilities.
5. **Phase 4 – Refinement & Automation (ongoing)**
   - Tune thresholds, add domain-specific rules, integrate model monitoring.

## 11. Open Questions
- Which storage backend best fits Claim Cards (PostgreSQL vs document store)?
- What is the acceptable latency overhead for Audit-Web responses?
- How will we authenticate and monitor external search APIs?
- What human escalation paths are required for regulatory compliance in specific jurisdictions?

## 12. Success Metrics
- ≥90% of audited claims labeled `SUPPORTED` without human intervention.
- ≤5% of audited claims escalated due to missing evidence after 30 days of operation.
- Average audit latency increase < 2s for Audit-Local mode.
- Nightly reports reduce knowledge-base correction backlog by ≥30% within the first quarter.

## 13. Appendix: Threshold Defaults
- `audit_score_threshold`: 0.80
- `selfcheck_disagreement_threshold`: 0.40
- `low_confidence_threshold`: 0.60
- Freshness policy: neuroscience sources ≤18 months old, general references ≤36 months.

Commit message:

Document audit store persistence decision

docs/audit_mode_spec.md, after:

# Theoria Audit and Verification System Specification

## 1. Purpose and Context
Theoria currently relies on retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to synthesize responses for domains that are rich in neuroscience and reasoning-heavy content. Because the product owners may not always have deep subject-matter expertise, they need an automated way to judge whether answers are faithful to trusted sources before presenting them to end users. This specification describes a multi-mode audit subsystem that adds layered verification, structured provenance logging, and human escalation paths without requiring a permanent human-in-the-loop.

## 2. High-Level Goals
- **Replace ad-hoc manual vetting** with an agentic workflow that self-checks answers before they reach users.
- **Expose actionable trust signals** (claim-level labels, confidence scores, provenance) so non-experts can decide when human review is required.
- **Maintain normal response speed** while providing an on-demand and automated audit trail for high-risk answers.
- **Support nightly batch verification** that surfaces problematic knowledge-base entries or stale citations.

## 3. Operating Modes
| Mode | Trigger | Behavior | Outputs |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Normal** | Default mode or user selection | Standard RAG answer generation using existing retrieval, answer drafting, and citation attachment. | Final answer with inline citations. |
| **Audit-Local** | Manual toggle or automatic trigger (e.g., domain risk level, user role) | Executes the verification loop using only indexed internal sources. Scores each claim for faithfulness and stores provenance. | Final answer, claim-level labels (SUPPORTED/REFUTED/NEI), confidence scores, structured Claim Cards. |
| **Audit-Web** | Escalation from Audit-Local due to low confidence, missing support, or conflicting evidence | Performs targeted web search against whitelisted domains, runs verification, and revises answer if needed. | Revised answer with external citations, Claim Cards noting external provenance, escalation log. |

## 4. System Components
### 4.1 Claim Extraction
- Segment each generated answer into atomic factual claims (numbers, named entities, causal statements).
- Use a deterministic prompt template that produces JSON `[{"claim_id": "c1", "text": "..."}, ...]`.

### 4.2 Verification Loop
1. **CoVe Self-Consistency**
   - Generate verification questions for each claim.
   - Re-answer using the retriever; compare with the drafted claim.
   - Produce a consistency score per claim.
2. **SelfCheck Sampling**
   - Sample `k` alternate answers using controlled temperature.
   - Flag claims that contradict or lack mention across samples.
3. **Evidence Retrieval**
   - Retrieve supporting passages from the knowledge base (and from the web when in Audit-Web mode).
   - Score relevance/faithfulness via embedding similarity and token overlap.
4. **RAGAS Scoring**
   - Compute faithfulness, answer relevance, and context precision/recall metrics.
   - Aggregate into `audit_score` ∈ [0,1].
5. **Claim Labeling**
   - Map evidence and scores to FEVER-style labels:
     - `SUPPORTED` when evidence aligns and score ≥ threshold.
     - `REFUTED` when evidence contradicts claim.
     - `NEI` when no evidence exists or confidence < threshold.

### 4.3 Escalation Logic
- Escalate to Audit-Web when any of the following are true:
  - Claim has `audit_score < audit_score_threshold` (see appendix).
  - No supporting passage retrieved locally.
  - SelfCheck disagreement ratio > `selfcheck_disagreement_threshold` (currently 0.40).
  - Source age exceeds freshness policy (e.g., >18 months for neuroscience claims).
- In Audit-Web mode, restrict searches to configured domains (PubMed, arXiv, ACL Anthology, etc.) and annotate Claim Cards with external provenance.

### 4.4 Provenance Logging
- Persist Claim Cards following a W3C PROV-inspired schema (see §6).
- Store linkage between answers, claims, evidence chunks, and verification methods.
- Support filtering and export (e.g., daily CSV/JSON bundles of low-confidence claims).

### 4.5 Nightly Batch Auditor
- Reprocess the day’s interactions focusing on claims labeled `REFUTED` or `NEI` with confidence <`low_confidence_threshold` (0.60).
- Re-run verification with refreshed retrieval indices and web checks.
- Produce a summary report (top failing KB entries, stale sources, recommended human review items).
- Optionally trigger re-indexing tasks or knowledge-base curation tickets.

## 5. Data Flow Overview
1. **Answer Drafting**: Standard RAG pipeline produces a draft answer with citations.
2. **Claim Extraction**: Draft is converted into atomic claims.
3. **Local Verification**: CoVe + SelfCheck + evidence retrieval produce metrics and labels.
4. **Escalation Decision**: Based on metrics, either finalize (Normal/Audit-Local) or escalate (Audit-Web).
5. **External Verification**: Conduct targeted web verification; update answer and labels.
6. **Storage**: Persist Claim Cards, audit metrics, and final answer in the audit store.
7. **Batch Processing**: Nightly job re-evaluates low-confidence claims and generates reports.

## 6. Claim Card Schema (JSON)
```json
{
  "claim_id": "c1",
  "answer_id": "a-2025-10-18-001",
  "text": "Long-term potentiation requires NMDA receptor activation.",
  "mode": "Audit-Local",
  "label": "SUPPORTED",
  "confidence": 0.87,
  "evidence": [
    {
      "source_type": "kb",
      "source_id": "kb_chunk_1345",
      "title": "Synaptic Plasticity Overview",
      "uri": "kb://synaptic_plasticity_overview",
      "snippet": "Long-term potentiation (LTP) is dependent on NMDA receptors...",
      "hash": "sha256:..."
    }
  ],
  "verification_methods": [
    "CoVe",
    "SelfCheckGPT",
    "RAGAS"
  ],
  "metrics": {
    "faithfulness": 0.86,
    "answer_relevance": 0.92,
    "context_precision": 0.78,
    "selfcheck_disagreement": 0.1
  },
  "timestamps": {
    "drafted_at": "2025-10-18T08:15:00Z",
    "verified_at": "2025-10-18T08:15:12Z"
  },
  "escalations": []
}
```

## 7. Integration Points
- **Retrieval Service**: Extend API to support claim-focused queries and freshness filters.
- **Generation Orchestrator**: Add mode toggle (Normal vs Audit-Local vs Audit-Web) and attach verification loop results to responses.
- **Audit Store**: Extend the existing PostgreSQL persistence layer with dedicated schemas/tables for Claim Cards and audit reports, leaning on JSONB columns for flexible metrics payloads while preserving relational joins for lineage, access control, and batch analytics.
- **Reporting Layer**: Dashboard widgets for trust scores, claim statuses, and nightly audit summaries.
- **External Search Connector**: Service wrapper for controlled web search with domain allow-listing and caching.

## 8. User Experience Considerations
- **UI Indicators**: Display per-claim badges (Supported, Refuted, Needs Evidence) with hover tooltips showing key metrics.
- **Mode Selection**: Provide toggle in admin console; allow per-user or per-conversation defaults.
- **Escalation Queue**: Dedicated view that lists claims requiring human follow-up, sorted by risk.
- **Export Functionality**: Allow exporting Claim Cards for external review (e.g., sending to a trusted agent for validation).

## 9. Security & Compliance
- Ensure external verification calls respect data residency policies.
- Hash or redact sensitive KB content when storing snippets.
- Maintain audit logs for regulatory compliance (timestamps, actors, decisions).

## 10. Implementation Roadmap
1. **Phase 0 – Foundations (1-2 weeks)**
   - Implement Claim Extraction service and Claim Card schema.
   - Integrate RAGAS scoring into current pipeline.
2. **Phase 1 – Audit-Local (2-3 weeks)**
   - Build verification loop with CoVe and SelfCheck.
   - Store Claim Cards and expose metrics in API/UI.
3. **Phase 2 – Audit-Web (2 weeks)**
   - Add escalation logic and external search connector.
   - Update UI to display external provenance.
4. **Phase 3 – Batch Auditor & Reporting (2 weeks)**
   - Implement nightly job, reporting dashboards, and export utilities.
5. **Phase 4 – Refinement & Automation (ongoing)**
   - Tune thresholds, add domain-specific rules, integrate model monitoring.

## 11. Open Questions
- **Storage backend decision (resolved)**: We will persist Claim Cards and audit telemetry in PostgreSQL alongside the existing Theo schemas. The audit workload requires transactional writes across answers, claims, evidence slices, and escalation events, along with referential integrity to user/session data in `theo/services/api/app/db/`. PostgreSQL already underpins that stack via SQLAlchemy, supports JSONB/ARRAY/TSVector columns that match the semi-structured metrics in §6, and powers the nightly rollups/reporting queries described in §7. Standing up a document store would duplicate infrastructure, break migration tooling (`run_sql_migrations.py` and Alembic-compatible SQL files), and complicate BI exports that currently assume SQL access. Instead, we will add migrations for new audit tables, reuse the existing async session factories, and expose read models tuned for reporting dashboards.
- **Document store evaluation**: A MongoDB/Cosmos-style store would simplify variable JSON payloads but would fragment provenance queries (multi-collection fan-out to reconstruct an answer’s lineage) and weaken compliance controls that depend on relational constraints and row-level retention policies. It would also require retooling batch reports to map-reduce style aggregations, increasing latency for nightly audit summaries.
- What is the acceptable latency overhead for Audit-Web responses?
- How will we authenticate and monitor external search APIs?
- What human escalation paths are required for regulatory compliance in specific jurisdictions?

## 12. Success Metrics
- ≥90% of audited claims labeled `SUPPORTED` without human intervention.
- ≤5% of audited claims escalated due to missing evidence after 30 days of operation.
- Average audit latency increase < 2s for Audit-Local mode.
- Nightly reports reduce knowledge-base correction backlog by ≥30% within the first quarter.

## 13. Appendix: Threshold Defaults
- `audit_score_threshold`: 0.80
- `selfcheck_disagreement_threshold`: 0.40
- `low_confidence_threshold`: 0.60
- Freshness policy: neuroscience sources ≤18 months old, general references ≤36 months.
